GEP(1958): TLS ALPN Routing (#1974)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-1958.md

Reviewer: That's an interesting idea, but could you share some real cases that we do need route connections according to the ALPN?

Reviewer 2: @dboslee just wanted to ping on this, as I think capturing a couple "user stories" or user-story-like things in the GEP could be helpful for future readers.

# GEP-1958: TLS ALPN Routing
Issue: #1958
Status: Provisional
## TLDR

> Add support for routing traffic based on the application protcols present in the TLS client hello of a TLS connection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add support for routing traffic based on the application protocols present in the "client hello" step of a TLS handshake.
```

> ## Goals

Reviewer 3: One thing we may need to take into account is not just routing based on the ALPN, but what ALPNs we should offer in the first place.

It doesn't help to have a ALPN route for `foobar` if the Gateway doesn't advertise it

Author: Good point, I think that depends on whether TLS termination or TLS passthrough is being used.

I was only considering the passthrough case where the gateway is not responsible for the response. In this case the gateway is only making routing decisions, its up to the service owner to ensure the given protocol is actually selected by the upstream service.

For the TLS termination case I suppose the gateway would need to be configured to route and select ALPN based on the values configured by the service owner.

Reviewer 3: Ah right, forgot that. I think TLS route is only for passthrough today (?) so that would solve that concern

Reviewer 4: I suspect we need ALPN both for TLS passthrough and for termination, and likely the APIs will be quite different. 

For passthrough - would be good to have some example use cases, I have not seen any server doing this and I'm not sure what will the user do - for example if alpn is 'h2', would the stream be routed to a different backend ? Doesn't seem a common enough use case.

 For 'terminate' - beyond an ordered list of protocols that the server accepts, not sure what else we can do. Server doesn't advertise protocols - it needs to selects one from the list sent by the client.

Besides h2 - I have not seen a lot of broadly used ALPNs on the internet.

Author: I think the two use cases and APIs are different enough that it makes sense to limit the scope this GEP to only include the tls passthrough use case.

Reviewer 2: Given the lack of response, we'll consider this comment resolved for the moment. Please mark it unresolved if more conversation is needed.

- Provide a way to route a TLS connection to a specific backend based on application protocols.

> - Define expected behavior for routing based on application protocols with respect to ordering and ambiguous matches.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

> - Define expected behavior for routing based on application protocols with respect to ordering and ambiguous matches.

Reviewer 3: This PR does not do this (or not completely, rather). Is it intended to achieve this goal in this PR or in the future?

Specifically, the handling of the fact a request has multiple ALPNs which are negotiated by the backends, and we may have listeners.

For instance, what is the behavior of:

Client ALPN: `[a, b, c]`
Listeners: `[no ALPN match, match ALPN=b, match ALPN=c]`
Server selects ALPN `c`

And many similar cases

## Non-Goals
- Match or detect protocols outside of the context of the application protocols present in the TLS client hello.

> - Provide routing based on any other TLS extensions.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

## Introduction
ALPN (application-layer protocol negotiation) is a TLS extension which is present in the TLS client hello.
It allows a client to specify a list of supported protocols when initiating a TLS connection.

Similar to SNI (server name indication), another TLS extension present in the TLS client hello, ALPN can be used
to route connections to different backends based on what application protocols the client supports.

> With this feature service owners may specify a list of application protocols to match and route TLS connections to a specific backend.

Reviewer 3: When we are routing it's based on the *client provided list of accepted ALPN*,right?

This may be odd for passthrough. Cliejt may present h2, http1. Route matches "h2" and routes. Backend selects "http1" .

Now our route that matched "h2" ends up serving http1/1

Author: This seems fine IMO as long as long as long as its clear how routing decisions are being made.
